PARQUET-2492: Add binary protocol extensions (#254)
apache/parquet-format: README.md

thrift parsers.

Such extensions can easily be appended to an existing Thrift serialized message
without any special APIs. Sample `C++` implementation is provided:

```c++
std::string AppendExtension(std::string thrift, std::string ext) {
  auto append_uleb = [](uint32_t x, std::string* out) {
    while (true) {
      int c = x & 0x7F;
      if ((x >>= 7) == 0) {
        out->push_back(c);
        return;
      } else {
        out->push_back(c | 0x80);
      }
    }
  };
  thrift.pop_back();  // remove the trailing 0
  thrift += "\x08\xFF\xFF\x01";  // long form field header for 32767: binary
  append_uleb(ext.size(), &thrift);
  thrift += ext;
  thrift += "\x00";  // add the trailing 0 back
  return thrift;
}
```

To facilitate independence of extensions between organizations the last 3 bytes
of an extension contain a magic number. The current reserved magic numbers are:

| Magic | Organization |
|-------|--------------|
| `PAR` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PAR1` |
| `PER` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PARE` |
| `ASF` | Apache |
| `CDH` | Cloudera |
| `CRM` | Salesforce |
| `DBR` | Databricks |

> | `EXP` | Apache/Experimental |

Reviewer: @alkis could I please reserve `AWS` for Amazon, thank you  :)

Author: Done.

thrift parsers.

Such extensions can easily be appended to an existing Thrift serialized message
without any special APIs. Sample `C++` implementation is provided:

```c++
std::string AppendExtension(std::string thrift, std::string ext) {
  auto append_uleb = [](uint32_t x, std::string* out) {
    while (true) {
      int c = x & 0x7F;
      if ((x >>= 7) == 0) {
        out->push_back(c);
        return;
      } else {
        out->push_back(c | 0x80);
      }
    }
  };
  thrift.pop_back();  // remove the trailing 0
  thrift += "\x08\xFF\xFF\x01";  // long form field header for 32767: binary
  append_uleb(ext.size(), &thrift);
  thrift += ext;
  thrift += "\x00";  // add the trailing 0 back
  return thrift;
}
```

To facilitate independence of extensions between organizations the last 3 bytes
of an extension contain a magic number. The current reserved magic numbers are:

| Magic | Organization |
|-------|--------------|
| `PAR` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PAR1` |
| `PER` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PARE` |
| `ASF` | Apache |
| `AWS` | Amazon |
| `CDH` | Cloudera |
| `CRM` | Salesforce |
| `DBR` | Databricks |

> | `EXP` | Apache/Experimental |

Reviewer 2: This seems to imply that the extension mechanism is exclusive. We can not have at the same time a new "PAR" metadata format and a proprietary extension.

Reviewer 2: Also,I think we should list here only names that are actually being used and add some information of where they are used and link corresponding documentation. I don't think we need to "reserve" potential future use by a company of their own name.

Author: It is exclusive because the extension mechanism covers: custom/internal extensions, experimental public extensions, and transition period for new additions to the standard.

I think an example will make this clearer.

The way I see this playing out is:
1. different vendors add their own extensions in a way that do not interfere with one another. By construction only one extension can be in a file - since a writer is owned by one vendor and will write that vendors extension. The disambiguator string here so that readers that know about *one* (or more) extensions can check if the extension that is present is one they can read. Some of these extensions will never be made public.
2. at some point a vendor say `NVD` wants to make their extension public by including it in the standard. At this point there is a formal proposal to include it in the format as a first class part of metadata.
3. the extension is reviewed and accepted - possibly in a form slightly different that proposed
4. the accepted proposal takes magic `PAR` and is now public. For a transition period the format contains the new format as an extension so that readers have time to be upgraded. This is one of the reasons we pre-reserve `PAR` now.
5. once the transition period is over, the extension verbatim becomes the new footer, but now without the thrift field header because it is no longer an extension. At this point we also say that the new magic for the parquet file in this version is `PAR\0`. This will require very little changes to readers that already supported (4).

Author: This was discussed in Parquet Sync on Jul 17th and was switched to UUID.

> 

Reviewer 3: Hi @alkis , can we reserve "NVD" for NVIDIA as well. Thank you very much!

Author: Done.

1. 3-byte magic extension: as per the specification. When this new
`FileMetaData` replaces the old, we can replace the thrift `FileMetaData`
including the trailing 8 bytes and replace them with our extension plus the
null byte verbatim.
2. `le32(N)` + `crc32(N)`: The pair of len and its crc32 is useful to validate
that the length is correct. Otherwise we might be tripped to read an
unspecified number of bytes only to later find their crc32 does not match.
3. `crc32(bytes)`: The crc32 of the new `FileMetaData` itself is important to
avoid reading corrupt or erroneous metadata.
4. The bytes of the encoding. This should be in our new encoding, for the sake
of argument flatbuffers, prefixed with an ID so that we as we experiment can
distinguish different versions of metadata.

The development and migration plan might look like:
1. A period where the new `FileMetaData` will be written after the old, with a
non-reserved 3 byte magic, say `DBR`.
2. Once the format stabilizes and is considered final, it is brought to the
parquet commitee for ratification.
3. When ratified the extension is moved to an approved state and takes the

> reserved 3 byte magic `PAR`.

Reviewer 2: If this is intended to be a temporary state while the new PAR footer format is being iterated on, maybe we don't need to reserve names like this as "PAR" will be the eventual replacement excluding other names.

It seems to me that this proposal would be better described as a path toward evolving the parquet footer while preserving compatibility for a while. The new footer replacing the existing one eventually.

I think extensibility would be useful as well but those two are not the same thing. By extensibility, I would expect users to have a safe, efficient way to add metadata to the file.

Reviewer 4: My main concern with this type of proposal, is the "considered final" piece.  I think if there is closed development here, some extent the incentives of getting to a new 'PAR' are potentially misaligned.  

I like how we are currently iterating in the open on the proposals so everyone has a chance to validate them and provide input.  From a community perspective there is obviously nothing that can be done to stop vendors from having custom metadata in the long run, but at least it would be nice to try to provide guidance for the interim process to encourage openness (maybe the table  above could also contain an optional link to a public repo/gist so that the community can keep tabs on the different approaches?)

Author: This was discussed in Parquet Sync and replaced with a UUID.

- Encodings: Encodings are specified by enum and more can be added in the future.
- Page types: Additional page types can be added and safely skipped.

### Thrift extensions
Thrift is used for metadata. The Thrift spec mandates that unknown fields are
skipped. To facilitate extensions Parquet reserves field-id `32767` of *every*
struct as an ignorable extension point. More specifically Parquet guarantees
that field-id `32767` will *never* be seen in the official Thrift IDL. The type

> of this field is always `binary`. 

Reviewer 2: I assume we constraint this to binary so that skipping it takes the least amount of time. It might be worth mentioning it here.

Author: Done.

Such extensions can easily be appended to an existing Thrift serialized message
without any special APIs. Sample `C++` implementation is provided:

```c++
std::string AppendExtension(std::string thrift, std::string ext) {
  auto append_uleb = [](uint32_t x, std::string* out) {
    while (true) {
      int c = x & 0x7F;
      if ((x >>= 7) == 0) {
        out->push_back(c);
        return;
      } else {
        out->push_back(c | 0x80);
      }
    }
  };
  thrift.pop_back();  // remove the trailing 0
  thrift += "\x08\xFF\xFF\x01";
  append_uleb(ext.size(), &thrift);
  thrift += ext;
  thrift += "\x00";  // add the trailing 0 back
  return thrift;
}
```

Additionally the binary extension MUST have a specific form in order to be
unambiguously identifiable by parsers that know of it and, as a corollary,
impossible to be accidentally generated by user data.

```

> N bytes: the extension data

Reviewer 5: I'd be tempted to declare that the first 2 bytes map to a format ID. This does stop extension formats being completely closed, provided the authors don't change it and document the structure

Reviewer 4: @steveloughran could you elaborate I'm don't think I understand what you  are suggesting?

Author: In practice they will start with some ID because vendors will experiment and need to disambiguate. But I do not want to specify this since it won't make it in the official spec.

For example, Databricks experiments with footers. It uses the above mechanism and rolls this out to several customers. The first byte contains some id for the blob:
1. some custom encoding to speed up colchunk offset parsing only, with the idea that this is enough to pipeline data I/O with metadata parsing
2. some more refinement to the encoding
3. another experiment, now with more structured data, say flatbuffers
4. refinement of (3)
5. etc
6. Final version proposed for inclusion to the spec
At this point (6) does not have to end up in the official spec. The way it will be added is either through changing the magic of parquet, or through adding a new binary field in `FileMetaData` that contains the final version of the encoding.

Reviewer 5: i'm just thinking "if ever you want to do any kind of reading across other apps, having a hint of structure would be good". Even if it is just to say "this file has databricks "type 2" footers rather than "something by databricks"

Author: I am still tempted to leave this out as I find it of little utility and unnecessary constraint. What if the designer actually uses some id or version but that's better put at the end of the binary blob before the crc of the len? Why do we want to force it to the start?

I am adding a paragraph to strongly suggest that implementors add an `id` to their extension to make interoperability easier in case it is needed but I leave it up to them to incorporate where they deem most appropriate.

Author: After thinking some more, I simplified the specification further.

I have removed all the fields from the encoding itself except the magic 3 byte disambiguator.

The rest are moved into an example section that describes how one might design a `FileMetaData` replacement.

The extension mechanism is very flexible, one might extend `ColumnMetaData` with some extra information and in that design the extension may be very different than the `FileMetaData` replacement.

4 bytes: little endian crc32 of the previous N bytes
4 bytes: N in little endian 
4 bytes: little endian crc32 of N
3 bytes: 3 byte magic extension (after this we have the Thrift stop-field)
```

The choice of the 3 byte magic is so that the magic plus the `\x00` for the
stop-field will form a new 4 byte magic which can replace `PAR1` or `PARE` in
the future when all engines adopt a new format.

Each organization/engine can reserve a magic extension here to avoid clashes.

> The current list of extensions are:

Reviewer 5: make a table, and clarify "current" to "at the time this specification was written"

Reviewer 4: along these lines, maybe clarify the process (i.e. it is not heavy weight all it requires is filing an issue and making a PR)?

Author: Done.

- `PAR`: Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PAR1`
- `PER`: Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PARE`

> - `DBR`: Databricks

Reviewer 5: * put in `CDH` for cloudera.
* put in `ASF` for apache software foundation (i.e. if projects can agree)

Reviewer 4: How do you see ASF different then PAR?  If this is for other projects I think they should probably reserve it.

Author: IIUC where @steveloughran is coming from `PAR` is reserved so that when we remove the old footer we end up with `PAR\x00` as magic. Similarly with `PER`. Everything else is going to be ephemeral/experimental.

Reviewer 5: EXP sounds good.

Author: Done.

- Encodings: Encodings are specified by enum and more can be added in the future.
- Page types: Additional page types can be added and safely skipped.

### Thrift extensions
Thrift is used for metadata. The Thrift spec mandates that unknown fields are
skipped. To facilitate extensions Parquet reserves field-id `32767` of *every*
struct as an ignorable extension point. More specifically Parquet guarantees
that field-id `32767` will *never* be seen in the official Thrift IDL. The type

> of this field is always `binary` for maximum extensibility and fast skipping by

Reviewer 6: Should we make this `BYTE_ARRAY` as per https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/251?
```suggestion
of this field is always `BYTE_ARRAY` for maximum extensibility and fast skipping by
```

Reviewer 7: Thrift doesn't have ``BYTE_ARRAY`, just `binary`. The former is a physical type in Parquet, but thrift messages don't use Par quet types.

thrift parsers.

Such extensions can easily be appended to an existing Thrift serialized message
without any special APIs. Sample `C++` implementation is provided:

```c++
std::string AppendExtension(std::string thrift, std::string ext) {
  auto append_uleb = [](uint32_t x, std::string* out) {
    while (true) {
      int c = x & 0x7F;
      if ((x >>= 7) == 0) {
        out->push_back(c);
        return;
      } else {
        out->push_back(c | 0x80);
      }
    }
  };
  thrift.pop_back();  // remove the trailing 0

>   thrift += "\x08\xFF\xFF\x01";

Reviewer 7: Add a comment what this magic number is.

Author: Done.

  append_uleb(ext.size(), &thrift);
  thrift += ext;
  thrift += "\x00";  // add the trailing 0 back
  return thrift;
}
```

Additionally the binary extension MUST have a specific form in order to be
unambiguously identifiable by parsers that know of it and, as a corollary,
impossible to be accidentally generated by user data.

```
N bytes: the extension data
4 bytes: little endian crc32 of the previous N bytes
4 bytes: N in little endian 
4 bytes: little endian crc32 of N
3 bytes: 3 byte magic extension (after this we have the Thrift stop-field)
```

The choice of the 3 byte magic is so that the magic plus the `\x00` for the
stop-field will form a new 4 byte magic which can replace `PAR1` or `PARE` in
the future when all engines adopt a new format.

Each organization/engine can reserve a magic extension here to avoid clashes.
To add your extension, file a JIRA and send a PR.

The current list of extensions are

| Magic | Organization |
|-------|--------------|
| `PAR` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PAR1` |
| `PER` | Reserved for the future when an extension replaces `PARE` |
| `DBR` | Databricks |
| `CDH` | Cloudera |

> | `ASF` | Apache |

Reviewer 7: If this PR gets merged, can I please reserve `CRM` for Salesforce, thanks :).

Author: Done.

- Encodings: Encodings are specified by enum and more can be added in the future.
- Page types: Additional page types can be added and safely skipped.

> ### Thrift extensions

Reviewer 8: We should perhaps move this to dedicated MD file, such that the examples can also be put in the same file?

Author: In the sync it was agreed that we put this small part here and pull only the examples in another file. I will wait for confirmation we want to move everything in another file before moving this. @julienledem WDYT?

Reviewer 8: This does not look that small in the context of a README :-) And it seems a bit weird to me to feature it prominently in the README even though it's meant to be a rather obscure feature.

Author: How about we leave in the README just this:

> Parquet Thrift IDL reserves field-id `32767` of every Thrift struct for extensions. The (Thrift) type of this field is always `binary`.

Reviewer 8: Yes, and link to the relevant document.

Author: Done.

    N-1 bytes | Thrift compact protocol encoded FileMetadata (minus \0 thrift stop field)
    4 bytes   | 08 FF FF 01 (long form header for 32767: binary)
    1-5 bytes | ULEB128(M) encoded size of the extension
    M bytes   | extension bytes
    1 byte    | \0 (thrift stop field)

The choice to reserve only one field-id has an additional (and frankly unintended) property. It creates scarcity in the extension space and disincentivizes vendors from keeping their extensions private. As a vendor having an extension means one cannot use it in tandem with other extensions from other vendors even if such extensions are publicly known. The easiest path of interoperability and ability to further experiment is to push an extension through standardization and continue experimenting with other ideas internally on top of the (now) standardized version.

#### Appending extensions to thrift

```c++
std::string AppendExtension(std::string thrift, std::string ext) {
  thrift.pop_back();                // remove the stop field
  thrift += "\x08";                 // binary
  AppendUleb(32767, &thrift);       // field-id

>   AppendUleb(ext.size(), &thrift);  // field isze

Reviewer 8: A definition of `AppendUleb` should be included as well.

Author: Done.
